\input texinfo  @c -*-Texinfo-*-
@setfilename vmm-tech.info
@settitle VMM Technical Manual
@footnotestyle end
@iftex
@afourpaper
@end iftex

@syncodeindex vr fn

@titlepage
@title VMM Technical Manual
@subtitle A virtual machine monitor for the Intel 80386
@author S.P.S. Evans
@author J.S. Harper
@author C.J. Luke
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top VMM Technical Manual

@menu
* Introduction::
* Initialisation::
* System Types::
* Kernel::
* Device Drivers::
* Virtual Devices::
* Filing System::
* Shell::
* Debugger::
* System Log Daemon::
* Printer Spooler::
* Utility Functions::
* Development Environment::

* Bibliography::
* Symbol Index::
* Type Index::
* Subject Index::
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@node Introduction, Initialisation, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction
@cindex Introduction

@include intro.texi

@node Initialisation, System Types, Introduction, Top
@chapter The Initialisation Process
@cindex Initialisation
@cindex Loader

@include loader.texi

@node System Types, Kernel, Initialisation, Top
@chapter System Types
@cindex System types
@cindex Types, system

@include types.texi

@node Kernel, Device Drivers, System Types, Top
@chapter The Kernel
@cindex Kernel

@include kernel.texi

@node Device Drivers, Virtual Devices, Kernel, Top
@chapter Device Drivers
@cindex Device drivers

@include devs.texi

@node Virtual Devices, Filing System, Device Drivers, Top
@chapter Virtual Devices
@cindex Virtual devices
@cindex Devices, virtual

@include vdevs.texi

@node Filing System, Shell, Virtual Devices, Top
@chapter The Filing System
@cindex Filing system

@include fs.texi

@node Shell, Debugger, Filing System, Top
@chapter The Shell
@cindex Shell

@include shell.texi

@node Debugger, System Log Daemon, Shell, Top
@chapter The Debugger
@cindex Debugger

@include debug.texi

@node System Log Daemon, Printer Spooler, Debugger, Top
@chapter System Log Daemon
@cindex Log daemon, system
@cindex Syslogd

@include syslogd.texi

@node Printer Spooler, Utility Functions, System Log Daemon, Top
@chapter Printer Spooler
@cindex Printer spooler
@cindex Spooler, printer

@include spooler.texi

@node Utility Functions, Development Environment, Printer Spooler, Top
@chapter Utility Functions
@cindex Utility functions
@cindex Library functions

@include utils.texi

@node Development Environment, Bibliography, Utility Functions, Top
@chapter Development Environment
@cindex Development environment

@include devel.texi

@node Bibliography, Symbol Index, Development Environment, Top
@chapter Bibliography
@cindex Bibliography

This chapter lists the sources of information which we have consulted
whilst tackling this project.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Intel Corporation, "80386 Programmer's Reference Manual", Santa Clara
Calif.: Intel, 1986.

@item
Intel Corporation, "80386 System Software Writer's Guide", Santa Clara
Calif.: Intel, 1986.

@item
Intel Corporation, "Intel486 Microprocessor Family Programmer's Reference Manual"
, Santa Clara Calif.: Intel, 1992.

@item
Intel Corporation, "Intel Microprocessor Peripherals Data Book", Santa Clara
Calif.: Intel 1986.

@item
NEC Corporation, "NEC Microprocessors and Peripherals Data Book Volume II",
1993.

@item
J. Sanchez and M.P. Canton, "PC Programmer's Handbook", 2nd
edition, McGraw-Hill, 1994.

@item
R. Wilton, "Programmer's Guide to PC & PS/2 Video System", Microsoft
Press, 1987.

@item
L. Torvalds et.al., Linux operating system sources, 1995.

@item
D. Jurgens, "HelpPC 2.10 Quick Reference Utility", 1991.

@item
ANSI X3 Committee, "AT Attachment Interface for Disk Drives (Draft)",
199x.

@item
H.M. Deitel, "Operating Systems", 2nd Edition, Addison-Wesley, 1990.

@item
A.M. Lister and R.D. Eager, "Fundamentals of Operating Systems", 4th
Edition, Macmillan, 1988.

@item
J.L. Peterson and A. Silberschatz, "Operating System Concepts", 2nd 
Edition, Addison-Wesley, 1985.

@item
H.M. Deitel and M.S. Kogan, "The Design of OS/2", Addison-Wesley, 1992.

@item
D. Bradley, "Implementing Direct Memory Access (DMA) in C", The C Users Journal,
May 1992.

@item
K. Hazzah, "DMA Revealed", Windows / DOS Developer's Journal, April 1992.

@item
IBM Corporation, "OS/2 Version 2.0 Technical Compendium - Volume 1: Control Program", 1992.

@item
IBM Corporation, "OS/2 Version 2.0 Technical Compendium - Volume 2: Dos and Windows Environment", 1992.
@end itemize

@node Symbol Index, Type Index, Bibliography, Top
@unnumbered Index of Functions, Macros and Variables

@printindex fn

@node Type Index, Subject Index, Symbol Index, Top
@unnumbered Index of Data Types

@printindex tp

@node Subject Index, , Type Index, Top
@unnumbered Subject Index

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
