
A @dfn{device driver} is a module used to control all accesses that the
system makes to a specific hardware resource. This chapter explains how
to use some of the system's device drivers, the drivers not documented
here are either invisible to the user or totally trivial.

Some of the modules documented here are not really device drivers, this
part of the manual seemed the best place for them though.

@menu
* Hard Disk::
* Floppy Disk::
* Ramdisk::
* TTY Device::
* Printer Spooler::
* Syslog Daemon::
@end menu

@node Hard Disk, Floppy Disk, , Devices
@section The Hard Disk Device Driver
@cindex Hard disk device driver
@cindex Devices, hard disk

The hard disk device driver allows the system (and especially, the
filing system, @pxref{Filing System}) to talk to any IDE hard disks
connected to the host computer.

When the hard disk driver is initialised it probes for IDE disks (only
on the first controller at present), and recognised disks are added to
the system's list of hard-disk-like devices. Each device is then
scanned for partitions, each partition is given a unique name and added
to the list of hard disk partitions that the system maintains.n

The name of each partition is made from the name of the disk (either
@samp{hda} or @samp{hdb}) and a number defining which partition it is.
The primary partitions are given numbers one to four, any extended
partitions are given numbers starting at five. For example @samp{hda1}
refers to the first primary partition of the first IDE hard disk,
while @samp{hdb6} refers to the second extended partition of the second
IDE disk.

A special partition is created which spans the whole of the hard disk,
it has the same name as the device it spans (i.e. @samp{hda}).

The hard disk defines the following shell commands.

@deffn {Command} hdinfo
List the currently recognised hard disk devices, and the partitions
which they contain.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} hdperf partition blocks [blocks-per-request]
This command times the performance of hard disk reads from the hard
disk partition @var{partition}. It reads @var{blocks} number of
512-byte blocks from the partition calculating the amount of time it
takes.

If the @var{blocks-per-request} parameter is defined it specifies the
number of blocks to read in each request made to the device driver.
Normally the data throughput should increase as this value is raised.

The time period is measured in @dfn{ticks}, each tick is 1/1024 of a
second.

This command actually makes two timings: the first by requesting the
device driver to read the blocks, the second by reading the blocks from
the filing system's buffer cache. The second timing will not work if
the partition is not mounted in the filing system (@pxref{Filing System}).
Also, the @var{blocks-per-request} argument is not used when reading
from the buffer-cache, a standard value of 2 is used.
@end deffn

For details on how to mount a hard disk partition in the filing system
see @ref{FS Devices}.

@node Floppy Disk, Ramdisk, Hard Disk, Devices
@section The Floppy Disk Device Driver
@cindex Floppy disk device driver
@cindex Devices, floppy disk

@include floppy.texi

@node Ramdisk, TTY Device, Floppy Disk, Devices
@section The Ramdisk
@cindex Ramdisk
@cindex Devices, ramdisk

@include ramdisk.texi

@node TTY Device, Printer Spooler, Ramdisk, Devices
@section The TTY Device Driver
@cindex TTY devices
@cindex Devices, tty
@cindex Consoles

A @dfn{tty} is a virtual console. Multiple tty's may be open at any
one time, the tty actually being displayed is known as the
@dfn{foreground tty}. Any characters typed at the keyboard are always
transmitted to the foreground tty.

TTY's are put to two main purposes by the system

@enumerate
@item
To give the shell (or any other task) a place to input and output.
Each shell opens a new tty from which it reads command lines, all
output from the shell goes to the same tty.

@item
To provide each virtual machine with virtual display hardware and a
virtual keyboard. All virtual machines have a tty allocated for them
when they are created.
@end enumerate

All tty's respond to the following hot keys (a key sequence that can
be typed at any time)

@table @kbd
@item Alt-@key{KpMinus}
(That's the @samp{-} key on the numeric key-pad while the @key{Alt} key
is held down.) Switch to the previous tty.

@item Alt-@key{KpPlus}
Switch to the next tty.

@item Alt-@key{SysReq}
Switch to the tty of the shell that was created when the system
initialised itself.

@item Alt-@key{ESC}
Spawn a new shell task in a new tty.

@item Ctrl-Alt-@key{DEL}
Reboot the system immediately.
@end table

When a line of input is being read from a tty (i.e. in a shell) that
is not in a virtual machine, the following commands are available to
edit the line being entered. In general these will be bound to the
same keys as the equivalent functions in the Emacs editor. The
following table lists the available commands, where the variable
@var{arg} is mentioned it refers to the @dfn{prefix argument} entered
by the metafied numeric keys.

@table @kbd
@item C-f
@itemx @key{Right}
Move forward @var{arg} characters.

@item C-b
@itemx @key{Left}
Move backward @var{arg} characters.

@item C-a
Move to the beginning of the line.

@item C-e
Move to the end of the line.

@item C-d
Either delete the @var{arg} characters starting with the one under the
cursor or if the cursor is at the end of the line accept the current
contents of the buffer (an end-of-line character).

@item @key{Backspace}
Delete the @var{arg} characters preceding the cursor.

@item @key{RET}
Insert a newline character at the end of the line and accept the
contents of the buffer.

@item C-l
Redisplay the buffer.

@item C-@key{SPC}
Set the value of the mark to the current cursor position.

@item C-x C-x
Exchange the cursor position with that of the mark.

@item C-n
@itemx @key{Down}
Move forward @var{arg} lines in the history list.

@item C-p
@itemx @key{Up}
Move back @var{arg} lines in the history list.

@item M-<
Display the first line in the history list.

@item M->
Display the last line in the history list.

@item M-0
@itemx M-1
@itemx M-2
@itemx M-3
@itemx M-4
@itemx M-5
@itemx M-6
@itemx M-7
@itemx M-8
@itemx M-9
Append the number typed to the end of the (decimal) prefix argument
for the following command. For example typing @kbd{M-1 M-0 C-f} moves
the cursor ten characters forwards.

@item M--
(That's @kbd{Meta-minus}.) Negate the value of the prefix argument for
the next command. For example typing @kbd{M-- M-4 C-f} moves
@emph{backwards} four characters.
@end table

@noindent
The notation @kbd{C-@var{x}} and @kbd{M-@var{x}} means the @var{x} key
with the @key{Control} modifier and the @key{Meta} qualifier
respectively. To generate a @kbd{M-@var{x}} event either type
@kbd{Alt-@var{x}} or @kbd{@key{ESC} @var{x}}.

@node Printer Spooler, Syslog Daemon, TTY Device, Devices
@section The Printer Spooler
@cindex Printer spooler
@cindex Spooler, printer

@include spooler.texi

@node Syslog Daemon, , Printer Spooler, Devices
@section The Syslog Daemon
@cindex Syslog daemon

@include syslogd.texi
