
The kernel provides the basic functionality of the system. You, the
user, don't need to know much about it. It defines the following shell
commands.

@deffn {Command} sysinfo options@dots{}
Prints information describing the current state of the system to the
shell. Possible flags for the @var{options} parameters are:

@table @code
@item -irq
Print the currently installed IRQ handlers.

@item -dma
Print the allocated DMA channels.

@item -mods
List the currently loaded modules.

@item -mm
Print the state of the memory management subsystem; the number of free
and available pages and the kernel break address.

@item -ps
List all the `live' tasks and information about them.
@end table
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} cookie
Print the contents of the `cookie jar', when the system is booted this
is filled with information about the hardware devices which the system
possesses.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} date
Display the current date and time.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} kill pid
Immediately kills the task (or virtual machine) whose ID is
the integer @var{pid}. If no task with this ID exists or the task may
not be killed an error message is printed.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} freeze pid
Suspend the task (or virtual machine) whose process-ID is the integer
@var{pid}. The task will not be runnable until the @code{thaw} command
is used to reverse the effect of this command.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} thaw pid
Allow the task with ID @var{pid} to run again. This undoes the effect
of the @code{freeze} command.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} open module-name
This command attempts to open the module called @var{module-name}.
This ensures that the module is loaded into memory. If the module can
be opened successfully it is immediately closed, otherwise an error
message is printed.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} expunge module-name
Try to remove the module called @var{module-name} from memory. This
only works if the module has no outstanding references to it and it
actually allows you to expunge it. If it can't be expunged an error
message is printed.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} sleep time
This command suspends the shell for @var{time} seconds.
@end deffn
