
The @dfn{shell} is the system's user interface. It allows you, the
user, to enter commands which the system then performs. When the
system is initialised a special shell, called the @dfn{system shell}
is created.

@menu
* Shell Basics::
* Shell Scripts::
* Online Help::
* Shell Commands::
@end menu

@node Shell Basics, Shell Scripts, , Shell
@section Basics
@cindex Shell basics

Each shell simply loops reading commands until it is told to exit,
each time a command is required the current prompt is printed to the
tty and a line of input is read from the same tty (@pxref{TTY Device}).

Once a whole line has been read it is split into words, each of
which is separated by a sequence of white-space characters (either
spaces or tabs). To create a word which contains spaces it can be
bracketed by two single-quote (@samp{'}) characters. If the first
non-white space character in a line is a hash character (@samp{#}) the
line is treated as a comment and ignored. 

After tokenising its input line the shell uses the first word in the
line to identify the command being invoked. It uses this word to
search the table of available commands, if a match is found the action
associated with this command is performed, using the remaining
words in the command line as parameters.

The system is not restricted to only one shell; the @code{shell} shell
command and the hot key @kbd{Alt-@key{ESC}} both create a new shell
process, running in a new tty.

@node Shell Scripts, Online Help, Shell Basics, Shell
@section Shell Scripts

A @dfn{shell script} is a file containing lines of shell commands.
This file can then be executed by the shell as though each line in the
file had been entered by hand. The only difference is that no prompt
is printed before each line. To execute a shell script use the
@code{source} command.

@findex .
@deffn {Command} source @var{file-name}
Execute in order the lines of the file called @var{file-name}. A
synonym for this command is @code{.}.
@end deffn

To allow you to configure the system to your needs two special shell
scripts can exist,

@table @file
@item /.profile
This shell script is executed when the system has finished
initialising itself.

@item /.shrc
This shell script is executed each time a new interactive shell is
created.
@end table

@node Online Help, Shell Commands, Shell Scripts, Shell
@section Online Help
@cindex Online help
@cindex Help, online
@cindex Shell, online help

To help you use the system the shell and its commands provide a
simple online help system. Each command provides a short
string documenting itself. The @code{help} shell command then uses
these strings to provide short pieces of help information.

@deffn {Command} help [command-name]
This command implements the shell's online help system. Invoking the
command with no parameter prints a list of the available commands to
the shell's tty.

When given, the @var{command-name} parameter should name a shell
command, its documentation string is searched for and if it exists it
will be printed to the tty.
@end deffn

@node Shell Commands, , Online Help, Shell
@section Miscellaneous Commands
@cindex Misc. shell commands
@cindex Shell, misc. commands

This section describes some of the other available shell commands.
Note that these are only the commands provided by the shell.
Commands provided by other modules of the system are documented with
the rest of that module.

@deffn {Command} echo @var{args}@dots{}
Prints each member of @var{args} to the tty, followed by a newline
character.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} prompt @var{prompt}
Set the string printed before each line in this shell to @var{prompt}.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} quit
Terminate the current shell.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} cls
Clear the screen of the current shell and move the cursor to its
top-left corner.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} shell
Spawn a new sub-shell in a new tty.
@end deffn

@deffn {Command} ed @var{dest-file}
Copies the following lines typed at the shell's tty to the file called
@var{dest-file}. The original contents of the file are discarded. End
the process by typing an end-of-file character (@kbd{Ctrl-d}).
@end deffn
